README.md, before:

# laserbeamFoam


## Overview
Presented here is the extensible open-source volume-of-fluid (VOF) solver laserbeamFoam, for studying high energy density laser based advanced manufacturing processes and laser-substrate interactions. In this implementation the metallic substrate, and shielding gas phase, are treated as in-compressible. The solver fully captures the fusion/melting state transition of the metallic substrate. For the vapourisation of the substrate, the explicit volumetric dilation due to the vapourisation state transition is neglected, instead, a phenomenological recoil pressure term is used to capture the contribution to the momentum and energy fields due to vaporisation events. laserbeamFoam also captures surface tension effects, the temperature dependence of surface tension (Marangoni) effects, latent heat effects due to melting/fusion (and vapourisation), buoyancy effects due to the thermal expansion of the phases using a Boussinesq approximation, and momentum damping due to solidification.

A ray-tracing algorithm is implemented that permits the incident Gaussian laser beam to be discretised based on the computational grid resolution. The 'Rays' of this incident laser beam are then tracked through the domain through their multiple reflections. The absorptivity of a particular ray is given using the Fresnel equations. 
The solver approach is based on the adiabatic two-phase interFoam code developed by [OpenCFD Ltd.](http://openfoam.com/). Target applications for laserbeamFoam include:

* Laser Welding
* Laser Drilling

The laserbeamFoam solver is evvectively an extension of the beamWeldFoam solver previously released, with the implementation of the Ray-Tracing functionality and the Fresnel absorptivity model.

## Installation

The current version of the code utilises the [OpenFoam6 libraries](https://openfoam.org/version/6/). The code has been developed and tested using an Ubuntu installation, but should work on any operating system capable of installing OpenFoam. To install the laserbeamFoam solver, first follow the instructions on this page: [OpenFoam 6 Install](https://openfoam.org/download/6-ubuntu/) to install the OpenFoam 6 libraries.



Then navigate to a working folder in a shell terminal, clone the git code repository, and build.

```
$ git clone https://github.com/micmog/laserbeamFoam.git laserbeamFoam
$ cd laserbeamFoam/applications/solvers/laserbeamFoam/
$ wclean
$ wmake
```
The installation can be tested using the tutorial cases described below.

## Tutorial cases
To run any of the tutorials in serial mode:
```
delete any old simulation files, e.g:
$ rm -r 0* 1* 2* 3* 4* 5* 6* 7* 8* 9*
Then:
$ cp -r initial 0
$ blockMesh
$ setFields
$ laserbeamFoam
```
For parallel deployment, using MPI, following the setFields command:
```
$ decomposePar
$ mpirun -np 6 laserbeamFoam -parallel >log &
```
for deployment on 6 cores.

## Algorithm

Initially the solver loads the mesh, reads in fields and boundary conditions, reads certain mesh information into arrays (for the heat source application), selects the turbulence model (if specified). The main solver loop is then initiated. First, the time step is
dynamically modified to ensure numerical stability. Next, the two-phase fluid mixture properties and turbulence quantities are updated. The discretized phase-fraction equation is then solved for a user-defined number of subtime steps (typically 3) using the multidimensional universal limiter with explicit solution solver [MULES](https://openfoam.org/release/2-3-0/multiphase/). This solver is included in the OpenFOAM library, and performs conservative solution of hyperbolic convective transport equations with defined bounds (0 and 1 for α1). Once the updated phase field is obtained, the program enters the pressure–velocity loop, in which p and u are corrected in an alternating fashion. In this loop T is also solved for, such that he buoyancy predictions are correct for the U and p fields. The process of correcting the pressure and velocity fields in sequence is known as pressure implicit with splitting of operators (PISO). In the OpenFOAM environment, PISO is repeated for multiple iterations at each time step. This process is referred to as merged PISO- semi-implicit method for pressure-linked equations (SIMPLE), or the pressure-velocity loop (PIMPLE) process, where SIMPLE is an iterative pressure–velocity solution algorithm. PIMPLE continues for a user specified number of iterations. 
The main solver loop iterates until program termination. A summary of the simulation algorithm is presented below:
* laserbeamFoam Simulation Algorithm Summary:
  * Initialize simulation data and mesh 
  * WHILE t<t_end DO
  * 1. Update delta_t for stability
  * 2. Phase equation sub-cycle
  * 3. Update interface location for heat source application
  * 4. Update fluid properties
  * 5. PISO Loop
    * 1. Form u equation
    * 2. Energy Transport Loop
      * 1. Solve T equation
      * 2. Update fluid fraction field
      * 3. Re-evaluate source terms due to latent heat
    * 3. PISO
        * 1. Obtain and correct face fluxes
        * 2. Solve p-Poisson equation
        * 3. Correct u
  * 6. Write Fields
  
Two sample tutorial cases, i.e. Gallium Meliing, and Sen and Davies cases are in strong agreement with experimental and analytical data available in the literature and serve as the validation cases for the implementation in beamWeldFoam.

## License
OpenFoam, and by extension the laserbeamFoam application, is licensed free and open source only under the [GNU General Public Licence version 3](https://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-3.0.en.html). One reason for OpenFOAM’s popularity is that its users are granted the freedom to modify and redistribute the software and have a right of continued free use, within the terms of the GPL.

## Acknowledgements
The work was generously supported by the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC) under the ''Cobalt-free Hard-facing for Reactor Systems'' grant EP/T016728/1, and Science Foundation Ireland (SFI), co-funded under European Regional Development Fund and by I-Form industry partners, grant 16/RC/3872.

## Citing This Work
If you use laserbeamFoam in your work. Please use the following to cite our work:

Thomas F. Flint, Gowthaman Parivendhan, Alojz Ivankovic, Michael C. Smith, Philip Cardiff,
beamWeldFoam: Numerical simulation of high energy density fusion and vapourisation-inducing processes,
SoftwareX,
Volume 18,
2022,
101065,
ISSN 2352-7110,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.softx.2022.101065

## References
* Kay Wittig and Petr A Nikrityuk 2012 IOP Conf. Ser.: Mater. Sci. Eng. 27 012054
* Sen, A., & Davis, S. (1982). Steady thermocapillary flows in two-dimensional slots. Journal of Fluid Mechanics, 121, 163-186. doi:10.1017/S0022112082001840
* Sabina L. Campanelli, Giuseppe Casalino, Michelangelo Mortello, Andrea Angelastro, Antonio Domenico Ludovico, Microstructural Characteristics and Mechanical Properties of Ti6Al4V Alloy Fiber Laser Welds

Commit message:

added tutorial details to the readme

README.md, after:

# laserbeamFoam


## Overview
Presented here is the extensible open-source volume-of-fluid (VOF) solver laserbeamFoam, for studying high energy density laser based advanced manufacturing processes and laser-substrate interactions. In this implementation the metallic substrate, and shielding gas phase, are treated as in-compressible. The solver fully captures the fusion/melting state transition of the metallic substrate. For the vapourisation of the substrate, the explicit volumetric dilation due to the vapourisation state transition is neglected, instead, a phenomenological recoil pressure term is used to capture the contribution to the momentum and energy fields due to vaporisation events. laserbeamFoam also captures surface tension effects, the temperature dependence of surface tension (Marangoni) effects, latent heat effects due to melting/fusion (and vapourisation), buoyancy effects due to the thermal expansion of the phases using a Boussinesq approximation, and momentum damping due to solidification.

A ray-tracing algorithm is implemented that permits the incident Gaussian laser beam to be discretised into a number of 'Rays' based on the computational grid resolution. The 'Rays' of this incident laser beam are then tracked through the domain through their multiple reflections; with the energy deposited by each ray determined through the Fresnel equations.
 
The solver approach is based on the adiabatic two-phase interFoam code developed by [OpenCFD Ltd.](http://openfoam.com/). Target applications for laserbeamFoam include:

* Laser Welding
* Laser Drilling
* Laser Powder Bed Fusion
* Selective Laser Melting

The laserbeamFoam solver is effectively an extension of the beamWeldFoam solver previously released, with the implementation of the Ray-Tracing functionality and the Fresnel absorptivity model.

## Installation

The current version of the code utilises the [OpenFoam6 libraries](https://openfoam.org/version/6/). The code has been developed and tested using an Ubuntu installation, but should work on any operating system capable of installing OpenFoam. To install the laserbeamFoam solver, first follow the instructions on this page: [OpenFoam 6 Install](https://openfoam.org/download/6-ubuntu/) to install the OpenFoam 6 libraries.



Then navigate to a working folder in a shell terminal, clone the git code repository, and build.

```
$ git clone https://github.com/micmog/laserbeamFoam.git laserbeamFoam
$ cd laserbeamFoam/applications/solvers/laserbeamFoam/
$ wclean
$ wmake
```
The installation can be tested using the tutorial cases described below.

## Tutorial cases
To run any of the tutorials in serial mode:
```
delete any old simulation files, e.g:
$ rm -r 0* 1* 2* 3* 4* 5* 6* 7* 8* 9*
Then:
$ cp -r initial 0
$ blockMesh
$ setFields
$ laserbeamFoam
```
For parallel deployment, using MPI, following the setFields command:
```
$ decomposePar
$ mpirun -np 6 laserbeamFoam -parallel >log &
```
for deployment on 6 cores.

### 2D Plate Examples

In these cases the penetration rate of an incident laser source is investigated based on the angle of incidence of the laser beam. Two cases are presented where the beam is either perpendicular to the substrate or at 45 degrees to the initial plate normal.

### 3D Plate Example

In this case the two-dimensional 45 degree example is extended to three dimensions.

### 2D circular particles Example

In this example a series of circular metallic regions are seeded on top of a planar substrate. The laser heat source traverses along the domain and melts these regions and their topology evolves accordingly.

### 2D Laser-Powder Bed Fusion Example

In this example a two-dimensional domain is seeded with many small powder particles with a complex size distribution, representative of that observed in the L-PBF manufacturing process. The laser heat source traverses the domain and a portion of these particles melt and re-solidify in the heat source wake.

## Algorithm

Initially the solver loads the mesh, reads in fields and boundary conditions, reads certain mesh information into arrays (for the heat source application), selects the turbulence model (if specified). The main solver loop is then initiated. First, the time step is
dynamically modified to ensure numerical stability. Next, the two-phase fluid mixture properties and turbulence quantities are updated. The discretized phase-fraction equation is then solved for a user-defined number of subtime steps (typically 3) using the multidimensional universal limiter with explicit solution solver [MULES](https://openfoam.org/release/2-3-0/multiphase/). This solver is included in the OpenFOAM library, and performs conservative solution of hyperbolic convective transport equations with defined bounds (0 and 1 for α1). Once the updated phase field is obtained, the program enters the pressure–velocity loop, in which p and u are corrected in an alternating fashion. In this loop T is also solved for, such that he buoyancy predictions are correct for the U and p fields. The process of correcting the pressure and velocity fields in sequence is known as pressure implicit with splitting of operators (PISO). In the OpenFOAM environment, PISO is repeated for multiple iterations at each time step. This process is referred to as merged PISO- semi-implicit method for pressure-linked equations (SIMPLE), or the pressure-velocity loop (PIMPLE) process, where SIMPLE is an iterative pressure–velocity solution algorithm. PIMPLE continues for a user specified number of iterations. 
The main solver loop iterates until program termination. A summary of the simulation algorithm is presented below:
* laserbeamFoam Simulation Algorithm Summary:
  * Initialize simulation data and mesh 
  * WHILE t<t_end DO
  * 1. Update delta_t for stability
  * 2. Phase equation sub-cycle
  * 3. Update interface location for heat source application
  * 4. Update fluid properties
  * 5. PISO Loop
    * 1. Form u equation
    * 2. Energy Transport Loop
      * 1. Solve T equation
      * 2. Update fluid fraction field
      * 3. Re-evaluate source terms due to latent heat
    * 3. PISO
        * 1. Obtain and correct face fluxes
        * 2. Solve p-Poisson equation
        * 3. Correct u
  * 6. Write Fields
  
There are no constraints on how the computational domain is discretised.

## License
OpenFoam, and by extension the laserbeamFoam application, is licensed free and open source only under the [GNU General Public Licence version 3](https://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-3.0.en.html). One reason for OpenFOAM’s popularity is that its users are granted the freedom to modify and redistribute the software and have a right of continued free use, within the terms of the GPL.

## Acknowledgements
The work was generously supported by the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC) under the ''Cobalt-free Hard-facing for Reactor Systems'' grant EP/T016728/1, and Science Foundation Ireland (SFI), co-funded under European Regional Development Fund and by I-Form industry partners, grant 16/RC/3872.

## Citing This Work
If you use laserbeamFoam in your work. Please use the following to cite our work until a more appropriate reference is available:

Thomas F. Flint, Gowthaman Parivendhan, Alojz Ivankovic, Michael C. Smith, Philip Cardiff,
beamWeldFoam: Numerical simulation of high energy density fusion and vapourisation-inducing processes,
SoftwareX,
Volume 18,
2022,
101065,
ISSN 2352-7110,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.softx.2022.101065

## References
* Kay Wittig and Petr A Nikrityuk 2012 IOP Conf. Ser.: Mater. Sci. Eng. 27 012054
* Sen, A., & Davis, S. (1982). Steady thermocapillary flows in two-dimensional slots. Journal of Fluid Mechanics, 121, 163-186. doi:10.1017/S0022112082001840
* Sabina L. Campanelli, Giuseppe Casalino, Michelangelo Mortello, Andrea Angelastro, Antonio Domenico Ludovico, Microstructural Characteristics and Mechanical Properties of Ti6Al4V Alloy Fiber Laser Welds



![visitors](https://visitor-badge.deta.dev/badge?page_id=micmog.LaserbeamFoam)
